# The Story and Philosophy of Judoscript


**Judoscript** is a general purpose programming language designed primarily for scripting tasks on the Java platform. It was conceived and developed by James Jianbo Huang (黃劍波 or 黄剑波; pinyin: Huáng Jiànbō), starting in late 2001. Judoscript was one of the first so-called Java scripting languages; but its most striking characteristics is its audacious multi-domain support philosophy and practice.

By the end of 2005, Judoscript has completed all the designated application features. The situation with Java scripting languages swiftly changed when JavaSoft announced to create its own in 2003. Judoscript's development was stopped when JavaSoft's own Groovy language was close to be released. Despite its ephemeral life span, Judoscript has remained dear to language designers and aficionados, and occupies a place in the programming language history, being the first and possibly the only general purpose language that embodies so many domain-specific declarative programming options.

## History
Huang has worked on a commercial report writer, SQR, which is used extensively in PeopleSoft. Technically, SQR is an archane, general purpose scripting language with embedded SQL and reporting directives for producing character-based reports and data manipulation. Written in C, it is ported to almost all flavors of major operating systems, and works with all major RDBMS databases. With the advent of Java and JDBC, Huang quickly realized that a single version of such software would eliminate the whole array of different ports of SQR. This was the seed of ''the Judoscript idea''.

Even back in the late 1990's, embedded SQL was not a new idea; for instance, Oracle's Pro*C did just that. Remarkably, embedded SQL is indeed a domain-specific (RDBMS) feature built into a general purpose language. Regular expression in Perl is another good example, in the domain of text handling. The ''vision'' of Judoscript started to take shape, to be ''a general purpose scripting language with declarative expressiveness for many popular programming domains in a coherent way.'' At the turn of the millennium, the Internet started to permeate our lives, and a growing number of key technologies were becoming widely adopted, therefore, choosing specific domains to support in Judoscript was not too hard a thing. In a way, this vision came about at the right time. The domain-specific features that were embodied in Judoscript's lifetime included JDBC scripting, SAX-style SGML and XML programming, WSDL scripting, Ant scripting, unified file system and archive scripting, Microsoft COM scripting, running native OS executables, send mail, HTTP and SCP scripting, and last but not least, Java scripting. Had Judoscript continued to grow, it would foreseeably contain more and more domain-specific support as new technologies become prevalent, such as NoSQL, Deep learning, etc.

Being a JVM-based scripting language, Judoscript has Java scripting as a first-class citizen. Judoscript has pioneered native Apache Ant support, allowing users to tap into the vast pool of utilities in the Apache Ant ecosystem. With native scripting capabilities with Java, Ant, WSDL, HTTP, and Microsoft's COM, Judoscript users can readily utilize resources from heterogeneous sources. The base language of Judoscript is very much JavaScript plus static class declaration. Like any scripting languages, Judoscript has various syntactic sugars, multi-line string literals, XML and regular expression literals, a versatile <code>print</code> statement, etc. However, while these aspects dominate the design of most other languages, general programmability is less significant a talking point compared to the language's key, unique characteristics.

The initial outlook of Judoscript crystallized and development commenced in late 2001; the first version was released in November. Judoscript became one of the first general purpose scripting languages designed specifically for use with the Java platform, along with Rhino, BeanShell, Jython, and a few others.

In 2004, Judoscript approached version 0.9. Development continued through 2005, where most of the final features were implemented. A key feature missing is the generation of Java bytecode either offline or at runtime, which was considered essential for such a language to reach version 1.0. For this matter, Huang has invented a Java macro assembly language, Jamaica. But this work for Judoscript was never achieved.

In JavaOne 2003, in June, JavaSoft announced its intention to create a wholly-owned scripting language for the Java platform. This monopolous move has stifled the lives of most of its competitors. The result was the Groovy language, whose name is apparently a phonetic morphing from "jruby", with its first version released in 2007. Its built-in Ant support is suspiciously connected to Judoscript's ''Ant scripting'' feature, chronologically speaking. When Groovy was about to be unleashed, Judoscript has lost impetus of moving forward. By the end of 2005, after a mere four years, Judoscript's development was stopped.

Even so, Judoscript has remained dear to language designers and aficionados, and occupies a place in the programming language history, being the first and possibly the only general purpose language with so many native domain-specific features built-in. The reason for this will be delved further later.

In October 2021, this Museum was set up here on Github.

## Philosophy
Huang argues that scripting languages are for doing small-to-moderate sized tasks conveniently, which can be one-off or repetitive; their programmability is for the processing power for those tasks, not meant to be used (or abused) to create large-scale software, since they are usually dynamically typed. "A piece of computer _software_, in contrast to a _script_, is typically a cohesive generalization of many related use cases, and static typing is what it deserves and demands, to enjoy rigorous support from tools such as compilers, static code analyzers, debuggers, etc. This is evidenced by Microsoft's Visual Basic language, which started with dynamic typing only; when its status was being elevated to that of a glue language for the company's new COM architecture and therefore a legitimate application developing tool, static typing quickly ensued," Huang said.

The design of Judoscript demonstrates Huang's ideal of this _using_ aspect of scripting languages to the extreme. Almost all general purpose algorithmic programming languages follow an _orthogonal_ design, which contains a small vocabulary of flow controls; a way of specifying data and data types, either statically or extensibly; and a _Library_ mechanism for extending and accumulating useful functionalities. In addition to all these, Judoscript provides a host of declarative programming options for supported domains, so that users "can express their intentions intuitively, succinctly and, hopefully, enjoyably," as Huang put it. In all the domain-specific statements, normal expressions can be embedded wherever appropriate; these statements are no different from other _regular_ statements; combining the declarative expressiveness and programmability, Judoscript renders a unique programming experience.

To further his belief in the _using_ nature of Judoscript, Huang even discourages people from creating libraries written in Judoscript. "Reusable libraries should be written in Java, for Judoscript (or any Java scripting languages) to use," he advocated.

For the sake of nomenclature, the term _domain_ used here is limited to common programming techniques in Information Technology, not application domains such as simulation of real world or virtual worlds, specific scientific areas, or huge computing service engines, etc. There is a loosely defined term, fourth-generation programming language or 4GL. SQR claims to be a 4GL; Judoscript would fit even better.
